Joining me in conversation today is
professor Christopher Bash. Um Christoph
Bash is professor emeritus in the
department of philosophy and religious
studies at Youngstown State University.
He's adjunct faculty at the California
Institute of Integral Studies and
ameritus fellow at the Institute of
Noetic Sciences and is on the advisory
council of gra legacy training. And he's
got quite a few nice books. Um, life
cycles, reincarnation and the web of
life, which I think was your first one,
right?
>> Uh, series books on psychedelics,
Dark Knight, Early Dawn, Steps to a Deep
Ecology of Mind, LSD and the Mind of the
Universe, Diamonds from Heaven, and The
Living Classroom, which just appeared in
a new edition. And so, as I said on my
first email, Chris, that book, I I've
had that book for a while. I read it a
few years ago. In fact, I had no idea at
the time that you had done all of this
other stuff. I thought it was you were
an education only person and I'd read it
and not Googled you further. I thought
it was great. I was sorting my books
out. That book fell off the shelf and I
thought that was a great book actually.
I'll see what he's doing since that and
then saw all of these uh other books on
LSD. And then you mentioned you've got a
new addition where the living classroom
turns out to have been heavily
uh impacted I don't know ever inspired
but impacted by a very lengthy series of
trials
um on
>> when I wrote that book first in 2008 I
deliberately kept psychedelics out of
the discussion because if people weren't
ready to have that discussion in 2008
and I didn't want psychedelics to get in
way of educators appropriating the
material. Uh my how we've changed in
since that time
>> well to now.
>> Exactly. I mean it's so when when was
the first edition released?
>> In 2008.
>> Okay. So that is
>> an edition where I tell the story of the
psychedelics in the background is uh
2024.
>> Yeah. So a massive shift and I mean
maybe it's um an interesting way of uh
opening things is a big question. I mean
not only has there been the psychedelic
renaissance shift which is clearly just
a part of a more general shift, right?
And um um um you've been looking at the
alternatives to scientific materialism
for a lot longer than most. So I mean so
how do you view this current time? How
do you sort of account for this rapid
switch that seems to be underway? And I
know you've mentioned things like
collective awakening. So, I mean, what's
your current view of the situation?
>> And welcome, by the way, Tracy. Thanks
for coming on.
>> I'm retired, so probably whatever my
current view is is out of date in terms
of people, you know, really pushing the
cutting edge. uh but in terms of
specifically the idea of psychedelics or
the idea of collective consciousness
I think there have been a lot of
developments in science that have uh
moved us along in that direction.
Science itself has deconstructed the m
materialism characteristic of Newtonian
physics and the early centuries of
science. But really since 1930 we've
been in a very different intellectual
world with quantum theory uh and
postquantum theory intellectual
development. So that we have a lot of
scientific work coming up and showing us
the the the non-local aspects of mind.
And even though most people, most
scientists still think of mind in terms
of local mind and think of mind as being
generated from the brain, increasingly a
large number of intellectuals are
questioning that hypothesis and pointing
to all the data that doesn't fit that
particular hypothesis. So from a variety
of different sources, uh I think we're
reaching a point where the negative data
is precipitating a paradigm shift into a
larger way of thinking and psychedelics
are just one small piece helping
catalyze that.
>> Yeah. I mean it's interesting in terms
of I mean you mentioned quantum theory
being in the 30s. It was a very similar
uh climate political
socially in the 30s. I mean, it had
every right back then, quantum theory,
of changing things permanently, but it
it didn't for some reason, right? There
were even early psychedelic explorations
in the 30s. Everything in quantum theory
that's here now was there then and it
was viewed in mystical terms by its
architects. What do you think went wrong
then? I mean, you know, I don't expect
you to have a detailed answer, but what
do you think went wrong then that is not
going to hopefully go wrong now and push
things the wrong way?
>> Well, again, I'm not the best person to
answer that question. I'm not a
historian of ideas or the of these
things. Uh, I'm not sure that it went
wrong so much as it takes a long time. I
mean, quantum theory is such a radical
departure from the assumptions we had
been making previously. It takes a long
time for the a radical shift like that
to work itself into our thinking
process. Uh and there's a great deal of
uh uncertainty on the interpretation of
quantum theory. So you know I think you
know science moves in in major paradigm
shifts. It takes decades
>> uh for this transition. So I'm I'm very
optimistic actually where we're going.
there's so much convergence of uh
information, new paradigm information
coming from multiple sources. Uh and
I've only been tending to one slice of
it in my professional life, you know,
but uh in a much larger arena uh there's
a there's a building momentum.
>> Yeah. I suppose one thing that knocked
the momentum out was the Second World
War, of course. So, we just have to be
careful that we don't end up with World
War II, which would disrupt things
rather a lot.
Um I mean on this same um topic. So I I
just as I said skimmed through far too
quickly your deep ecology of mind book
and we'll get to that
>> really gone. Yeah.
>> Yeah. We'll get to that later I hope.
But um you know one of the kind of views
presented there is that the world is a
can be viewed as a kind of mirror of the
collective psyche of what's going on
internally we might say. So we have very
interesting things going on at the
moment. We have wars which are seem to
be ramping up. There's the climate issue
which is symbolically interesting and
there's also AI and I've not really seen
you mention AI much because once again
AI as well is a rapidly uh accelerating
thing that I mean that's been probably
the most rapidly accelerated thing of
all right how do you view AI especially
to start with and the emergence it
>> well you know I'm a bystander in this
process uh I'm watching it I'm I read a
few books books here and there and track
some of the articles. I'm not
mathematically competent enough to get
deeply into the the program issues. Uh I
watched two diff both sides of the
debate. Those the ones who are thinking
it's going to revolutionize us for the
better and that seems to have powerful
proponents. On the other hand, I see the
extreme caution. uh we're already seeing
uh problems emerging from chat box being
used in therapeutic uh context. So I I
just am watching from the sidelines to
see it is very fascinating. I don't I
really try to not formulate opinions
about things that I don't have
professional expertise in. You know
there's a fallacy and academics talk
about the the generalization of
expertise. I try not to make that
fallacy. I try to kind of stay in my
lane. Um I have layman's exposure to
these things but not professional
exposure
but it is a major it's a major change
coming.
>> Yeah. Do you find something maybe
interesting in the I mean even the
terminology artificial as opposed to
natural and I'm just thinking in terms
of your
uh discussion of the chy bardau and the
idea that you know these we can have
things manifest as peace peaceful or
raffle and we see these same kinds of
things in the presentation of AI right
it's either going to end us all in some
sort of catastrophic extinction event or
it's going to make the world a
completely better place for us. So in
terms of its symbology,
do do you have any sense of why it might
be arising now at this point?
>> I really kind of would rather move not
answer that in terms of symbology and
really just put it very simply. uh our
technology
when it's in the hands of someone whose
heart is mature and has opened that
makes us use this technology safely in a
non-injurious always beneficial way. If
this technology and any technology is in
the hands of someone whose heart is
closed and is is not open and is is
basically very tight and functioning at
a lower level and a materialist kind of
level then that technology can become
dangerous. Uh so in some ways once again
we're finding ourselves in a race
between technological development and
existential development our personal
development. Will humanity develop fast
enough
spiritually, existentially,
psychologically, will we develop fast
enough in order to make our accelerating
technology safe for other human beings
and for the rest of the planet?
>> Yeah, I think that's a um a perfect
answer. And it as I mean and
generalizing it like that, it could fit
previous examples such as the atom bomb,
right? there was a a similar situation
where it could be used for peace and
power you know energy things like that
or for destruction and we had the same
choice again
>> yeah very
>> I mean the internet can be used a very
powerful educational way and can be very
uh it can facilitate really dark shadow
elements of the collective psyche coming
forward so it's true for all of our
technology you know we are in a
high-tech era uh and it's giving us
unpreced unprecedented power in
different areas. Do we have the wisdom
uh to handle that power? And I think
what what's happening one part of what's
happening is the very acceleration of
technology is forcing the issue of
evaluating our our psychological
maturity. uh and I think basically it's
putting tremendous pressure and the
pressure will be increasing not just
from a technological aspects but from
the ecological impacts of
industrial society coming at us
cascading series of crisis coming at us
over the next 50 years uh and coming at
us fast u which I think is putting
enormous pressure on us to grow up to
really grow up to stop acting like um
adolescence. And not that adolescence
are bad, but it's it's a premature level
of human development. And I have a
certain understanding of what growing up
looks like or might look like. Uh when I
think of this in terms of a
reincarnational perspective, which my
first book was on reincarnation, which I
consider kind of a a foundational
question. Do we live on earth only one
time or do we live on earth many times?
and philosophies divide on how they
answer that question. And because I
think we have overwhelming empirical
evidence that we live on earth many
times, then that allows us to really
look at the larger the topic of the
evolution of the human psyche not in
terms of short cycles or even cultural
cycles, but in terms of long
developmental cycles because we've been
reincarnating for thousands and tens of
thousands and hundreds of thousands of
years. So
>> yeah, nice. And I suppose it um gives
you a a different way of understanding
as you've put it what these pressures
are. I mean they are often serving a
function right they might look terrible
a lot of these things like the climate
disaster and wars they are terrible but
there's something going on behind the
scenes right which is that it's forcing
something to happen it's forcing a
change to occur because if it wasn't
there there would be no pressure no
friction to cause changes to occur.
>> Yeah. I mean we'll I'd like to go into
the life cycles book in a second but um
so a question I've asked uh a couple of
others now is this the role of the I
mean you have an answer with the
reincarnation approach I suppose but how
do you view the role of materialism and
the density
um of this place and it almost seems
like we we came into this place under a
kind of hypnosis
where we're told almost from day one
that this is just a material universe
now.
>> Mhm.
>> And it obviously constrains your
possibilities. But might might even this
sort of abstract level be applying
pressure to make us think that we only
have one shot. Do you do you see a role
for that?
>> Well, that's a that's a long and complex
story that you're uh that you're
pointing to. we uh you know because I
mean I basically have spent my life
teaching world religions and you know
Eastern religions and Buddhism and
transpersonal psychology and comparative
mysticism and so I I tend to look at
these things from a long perspective
and um one of the things one of the
early uh qualities of the axial age
religions the religions that came into
existence about 3,000 years years ago is
um they tend to be for the popular
masses
what you might consider up and out
religions. So the goal is to achieve
some state whether it's enlightenment or
salvation or something that
basically is the culmination of your
development over many many lifetimes or
through the sacrificial death of Christ
or so on so forth and the reward of
achieving that takes place off planet.
So you want to go to heaven, you want to
go to the paradise, you want to go to
the Buddha domain, the Buddha world, or
you want to go to the garden. But what
that leaves fundamentally unexamined or
unanswered the question is, what is the
purpose of space and time? Is it only a
prison that we've been dumped into that
we want to get away from? Is it a veil
of tears? And that might work. I mean,
we might think in those terms in terms
of a when we were still thinking that
the universe was only 6,000 years old,
but now that we understand the universe
is 13.7 billion years old in just this
iteration and we don't know how many
iterations there have been. Uh, and we
have a sense of how large the universe
is. something so large we measure it in
terms of light years and that's how
that's 6 million million miles you know
and that's just the incremental
measuring stick we use it it's not
really very satisfying I think that the
whole purpose of existence after 13.7
billion years of evolution and all the
cultural evolution all the from homo
erectus and homohabilis and erectus and
sapiens and when we just begin to be
conscious when about 5,000 years ago
when we began to be able to understand
we learn to focus our consciousness and
drop down to that level of mind where we
tap that in us which is universal that
in me which is the same as that in every
other life form just at that point when
we reach that stage then we leave the
whole system behind and don't come back
and that leaves the physical universe
basically underestimated undervalued
It's it's it's separated. It's not part
of the spiritual story.
>> And so when science comes along and
basically drops away the theologies of
these religions and it empowers it's a
very powerful understanding of nature
and it deepens our understanding of
nature. Then in that context
nature is what's real and they don't
believe that anything else is real. So
spirit is not real. Nature is what real
brain produces your mind. Uh when your
brain dies, you die. You cease to exist
and so on so forth. That's that's a long
evolutionary journey. And in some ways
um it's been very healthy for humanity
because this focus on the empowerment of
the individual
over in the modern era over these
thousands of years in contrast to much
earlier anthropological times when the
individual was really kind of subsumed
within the group mind of the tribe uh
less differentiated. Now the mind is
increasingly differentiated,
able to look on its thousands of years
of history and challenge it. Martin
Luther King nails the 96 thesis on the
cathedral door saying why and where the
Catholic Church went wrong in its
1500year history at that point in time.
That's tremendous empowerment. The cost
of that empowerment of course is that it
it champions the individual but in a way
where the individual loses contact with
the connective tissue of life connecting
it him and her to other human beings and
to other forms of life and to that more
subtle realm of spiritual reality which
underlies all of life all the physical
existence. So it's not that I think it's
been a tremendous cultural progression
from kind of embedded consciousness to
differentiated consciousness and now
we're bringing the context of the deeper
matrix within which we we live. Uh and
it doesn't suffocate individuality. It
actually liberates our individuality
into higher forms of of self-expression
and creativity. So it's a long
complicated story and I'm not doing
justice to it. Uh but I think we are at
an exciting point. We are at a point
where we're beginning to recognize that
the story the the basic models of
existence that we've created in order to
interpret the human story are
inadequate. The reductive model of
materialism just doesn't jive with the
facts. There's too much counter evidence
for it. We not want to we don't we
certainly are not going to abandon
science, but we're re-examining the
metaphysical context within which
science is being used and operating. And
that brings us to a very exciting time
in history.
Yeah. No, that's a good answer. Um I
mean yeah one of but another part of the
point I was getting at is that
materialism itself even though it's a
set of ideas and we might not think of a
set of ideas as providing something like
the friction required for growth to
spiritual evolution. Clearly it has
because there's a set of people you
included who have been almost pushed as
much as by matter itself by the idea
that matter is all there is into this of
these other realms. So it's almost part
of the the process along with matter
itself. The set of ideas
>> dense I mean yeah
>> to sort of jump ahead and jump ahead in
the conversation in some ways
>> in spiritual reality we can create
reality with the power of thought. In
physical reality we are highly
constrained. It's like the we're highly
constrained. We can't create reality
with the power of thought. Some
individuals, superconscious individuals
can influence physical reality with
great freedom, but the average person
cannot. In that context, when you look
at some of these developments from a
spiritual perspective,
um matter and the density of matter is
some is kind of like the weight on a
weightlifter's bar. uh it builds it
builds muscles faster certain muscles
faster than could be built in the
spiritual world. So a weightlifter
doesn't complain about the weight on the
bar. They put the weight on the bar in
order to make it easier for them to
develop the strength that they want to
streng they want to develop. And I think
it's I mean that's an oversimplification
of course but I think something like
that is true here. Matter is very dense.
The physical world is very dense. I
think we go back from spirit into matter
and spirit into matter, reincarnation
many many times and we know that the
spiritual world is much more malleable,
much more supportive, uh much easier to
navigate. Physical reality is dense and
challenging. But in that process, we are
developing skills and capacities with
this density of matter that would take
countless eons otherwise. So I think
that just you're right that density the
density of matter is an important part
if you want to understand the large
cosmological story.
This is um I mean it reminds me of some
rosacruian ideas in fact from the very
beginning of your books from the life
cycles one there's something very
rosacrruian about it the idea that you
go there's the rose and the cross and
the cross is spacetime and physical
matter right and you got to go through
it to get to the rose and that's how you
grow the soul grows and unfolds through
these trials right which is kind of what
you did and we'll get to that later on
in your LSD trials
I mean just on this density issue
because there's something uh interesting
behind it I think. I mean as you've also
expressed in your books in many places
fundamentally or ultimately there's
really only one stuff right there's just
the all. So it's not that matter is one
thing or the other. It isn't the density
is in some sense our expectation and
awareness the way we approach it
like the the world out the world is what
it is and our approach to it determines
the density perhaps I mean might that be
going on because otherwise you've got
this strange stratified reality where
bits of it really are sort of more solid
other bits are more wispy and the mind
sort of moves between them and comes
across them and finds them like that.
But might it be that there's just one
thing out there which is in a state of
sort of waiting for your awareness to to
decide whether it's dense or not almost.
>> Well, I don't know. I mean certainly we
know enough about quantum theory to
understand that the observer can
influence the outcome of exper
experiments.
Um it's
again these are these are very large
complex questions you're asking you know
they kind of they take us a long time to
gather all the relevant pieces of kind
of insights and information uh in order
to just to attempt to answer it there
metaphysically I mean I kind of hold to
the position that kind of at the deepest
level
reality is on you know that's some
people would call it pansychism other
people would call it panentheism
other people would call it monism but
the fundamental vision is that
everything is at core one and within
this oneness there is differentiation
and so we're not saying ants are the
same as elephants there is
differentiation but at core it is one
and it all emerged from the one and the
Big bang theory and modern cosmology
gives us a context which with then we
can begin to understand some of the
mechanisms of this that if everything
came out of a void and manifested with
this explosion of energy the big bang or
some would call it the big birth.
Everything that exists came out of this
and is is of this in its origin and even
as it differentiates it carries the
quality of the oneness underneath at its
central piece. Now we come along 13.7
billion years later. We're beginning to
be awake. We're beginning just just
beginning to be aware of this world.
Just beginning to look deep inside. just
beginning to look deeply into the
electron and into the quam fields. And
we keep on running into this phenomenon
that there is a fundamental field, a
zero point field, a fundamental reality
which encompasses
and um supports all [snorts]
differentiated reality. And
psychologically, psychosspiritually,
we know that we when we go deeply
inside, we slip underneath all those
things, those pretty things which make
us the interesting individuals that we
are. But the animating force, the
clarity and consciousness which lies at
the center of a human being is one with
all of life, with everything that
exists. So that is that which is the
essence of me is the essence of the
totality of everything. So in that
perspective
uh we we have to face two fundamental
truths. The universe
is born in one in oneness. It's born out
of oneness. That's oneness is a
fundamental truth and at the same time
differentiation, uniqueness,
individuality is a fundamental truth and
it's not a matter of choosing one over
the other. They are both inter
interdependent and alive phenomena. And
we live at this point where we are not
sacrificing individuality
but we are recontextualizing it in the
context of oneness. And that just opens
up and that just opens up a whole realm
of new possibilities as our
consciousness gets able to stride that
the stride that distinction
uh with greater precision. Yeah,
>> I agree. I mean I'm a monist as well and
agree with the differentiation and have
defended dual aspect monism with Harold
Atman Spark in a book on on this and
it's tricky. I mean the way we view it,
you need um the element of subjectivity.
It's a yungian idea, right? You need the
element of subjectivity to get
objectivity. So there's a polarization
that's nonfunddamental. It's not part of
reality. It's almost an epistemic as
it's an aspect that you're seeing world
through rather than being fundamental
part of the world.
>> Mhm.
>> Okay. I mean, while we're still there,
how do you view the notion of
subjectivity? So you talk a lot and
we'll get to it later about collective
minds and individual minds but there's
um a component of subjectivity that
obviously seems to be the stumbling
block for generating collective minds.
Right? My first person perspective
uh is seems to be very very private and
it's the source of the hard problem of
consciousness and these kinds of things.
How do you um account for the presence
of subjectivity in the world? What's
your view of subjectivity?
>> Well, I tend to avoid questions like
that.
You know, I tend to avoid them because I
kind of I dig into I start at a
different starting point.
uh you know I I think [snorts]
I don't think um subjectivity or the the
concept of subjectivity is necessarily
the best point of entry if we want to
understand uh how our minds function and
what they are. I take a more
phenomenological
approach a pragmatic empiricism a
phenomenological approach. What we want
to do is ask what can the mind do? How
does it function? How not not where not
what are the neuron patterns that make
it but what does mind do? What does what
is its capacity? Um not only the
capacity that you and I are using in
conversation right now to think and
analyze and and go back and forth. But
how deep does mind go and how far can we
know? And you know as I one of the
things I write about in the living
classroom
is my discovery that at one level my
mind is clearly private from independent
of the minds of my students. Clearly
that's true. But I've discovered that
that's only half the truth. There's
another half of of truth which points
out that our minds are interconnected
always and they interpenetrate always
and under certain conditions that
quality what you might call the quantum
quality or the field quality of mind can
become prominent and it can become
active in the room not in a way that
cancels individuality but in a way which
actually liberates individuality into
higher orders of expression. So I I came
to understand that groups of people
working with focused intention on
clearly defined and emotionally moving
projects over long periods of time
actually generate a kind of group mind
and you can call it subjective or call
it objective whatever you want but it is
a group functioning mind. I've learned
that there are certain circumstances in
which
the be the usual membrane between my
mind and my students mind becomes porous
and I have access to their to their life
experience in a way that was
unintentional. I would be lecturing and
I would simply be reaching into the void
to pull up an example to make a an on a
point that I was making and students
began to come up to me after class and
say, "Well, you know, it's strange that
you use that example today because
that's exactly what happened to me this
week." And at first I thought, "Oh,
that's an interesting statistical, you
know, didn't make [snorts] anything to
do of it. It's a possibility." But it
kept happening and it kept happening and
as my spiritual practice, my psychedelic
practice deepened, I began to find that
those ways in which my mind was
receiving information about their life,
it began to touch deeper and deeper
places in their lives. It began to touch
pains that they were carrying, things
that they really needed to know. So
now I'm see I'm not even interested in
talking about subjectivity here. Just
the phenomenology is I have an awareness
of things which technically you might
say are in a Newtonian world I shouldn't
have awareness of right but I do and
there's meaning in that awareness
there's synchronicity in that awareness
there's intentionality in that awareness
and eventually I had to develop a whole
new way of teaching on the one hand
which honored our individuality and
recognizes that truth and on the other
hand which honors the field dynamics of
mind, what I call the field dynamics of
mind. And I developed what you might
call a quantum pedagogy. Uh I began to
experiment with and develop protocols in
the classroom that recognized
this interconnected quality of mind and
could be brought forward and could be
intensified if you taught in a certain
way. if you use certain strategies to
facilitate creative discussions in the
classroom. So, so I was able to do all
of that and I also brought in all sorts
of research in the book where we have
empirically demonstrated the
permeability of one mind to another mind
in very carefully controlled ex
experimental situations
uh
and without even defining what
subjectivity is. You see it's just a
phenomenological description of the
limits of mind. So the way
um the way I would think about this is
um I mean it's almost in a Yian sense,
right? So the concept of synchronicity,
the whole point of it is that it's a
non-causal connection between minds and
the world and other minds, right? That's
what synchronicity is. So it's not when
you're in your group with your student,
this is just how I'm going to try and
conceptualize it. When you're in your
group, it's not a direct mind-to-minding
that's going on. It's that you are
dipping somewhere else almost going
beyond mind and matter. You know, maybe
the psychoid realm of Jung could serve
this function. You are dipping down
where there's not any definite fixed
thought yet and all the ideas are down
there and then they are brought back up.
Well, here let me offer a slight
revision of Jung. Jung was operating in
the in the field of the physics of his
day and the zeitgeist of his day. And
when he called synchronicity an aausal
connecting principle,
I think that's a mistake. But I
understand why he said it. I understand
the point he was making. What he was
trying to say is the connection between
A and B is not being mediated by
causality as we understand causality
today. It's not being mediated by
physical causality as we understand
physical causality.
But rather than call it aausal
non-causal, I would rather point out
that there are different levels and
gradations of causality that run at
subtler and subtler levels. So I think
there truly is a mind-to- mind contact.
There is a a symphony of consciousness
between multiple minds, different minds
in the room. There's an underlying
symphony that almost kind of swells at
certain points. You can feel it when
when the room gets lifted into a higher
level of awareness operating. Now rather
than say that's an an aausal connection,
I would suggest that we might think of
this as this is a connection that's
operating at a subtle level of real
subtler level. It's at a quantum level
or it's at something subtler. You see?
>> Yeah. This is how I would agree. Yeah.
>> Yeah. And so I think Young was great. I
mean, I'm a real young fan, but he was
using language to try to speak to the
time to times that he was in. And I I
think we don't have to be beholden to
that language and to create a
metaphysical construct
based on his choice of words to make the
point he was making. Because what he was
pointing to is there are relationships
often that manifest where we can't
identify any physical causality and yet
we can identify the meaning of the
juxtiposition.
Now what is the nature of that meeting?
What is how do we how does this meeting
what does it tell us about how reality
is organized? That's the important
question.
>> Yeah. Well, I mean ultimately he does
end up saying that they are connected by
meaning, right? That's the the the
defining characteristic of synchronicity
is not just a correlation but they're
connected by improbabilistic usually
meaningful connections. there's
connection and it has meaning. But yeah,
you're probably right in terms of the
terminology of causation.
>> Um, and of course, I mean, what's going
on in your classroom has been
um noticed by therapists, right? It's
when therapists are engaged with their
analyst hands, they know they often say
that there is something we're talking
together, but there is communication
going on at an entirely different level.
And that's the sense of transference and
counter transference is not anything
verbal or direct.
>> So it would fit.
>> My experience is exactly that in the
classroom there's an exchange taking
place at the cognitive level. I'm
lecturing there I'm answering questions
but underneath that there's an energetic
exchange. Let me see if I can get this.
[laughter] There's an energetic exchange
taking place between my life force and
their life force.
And often um what the cognitive aspect
can become a vehicle for a transmission
that takes place at a deeper more subtle
energy level. And I think therapists say
that sure they do feel this all the
time. It's almost like they can feel it
when there's this ping that goes off and
suddenly they have an insight, an
awareness that was not coming exactly
from them, but it was coming from both
of they and the client together. It, you
know, it there was an igniting taking
place between the two. Yeah. So, it's
many times and ba baseball coaches,
basketball coaches talk about this. I
mean, I give examples in the living
classroom of different coaches who talk
about what happens when a team seems to
gel and they start to move like fingers,
five fingers on one hand and what
they're doing just seems impossible.
They they know where people are without
even looking, but there is a subtle
psychic connection that they're making
uh in a group in a group mind. The
emergence of a group mind. Yeah, that's
a very Mike Murphy vessel and kind of
example. It is.
>> Um, so and yeah, I mean, so there's it's
been noticed many times and there's
we're obviously trying to find different
the same thing. We've got all these
different words. I suppose another one
would be morphic fields, right? Morphic
fields are what you call subtle channels
and it's the same concept and we're
trying to describe it differently.
>> Sheldrake's work. Yeah. And I use Rupert
Sheldrake's work in uh in my work in the
living classroom. And Sheldrake's
insight is that uh
when learning seems to take place
oversimplifying again at two levels, it
takes place at the individual level, but
it also seems to take place at the
species level. So that all it's like you
think of all the members of the species
again as fingers on the hand. The
fingers are learning, but there's also a
level of learning that's being taken
that's taking place at the deeper level
at the at the integrated level, the
field level. And
>> that we can demonstrate that this
phenomenon takes place uh groups when
they're learning a new behavior. In the
beginning, this behavior has to be it
spreads very slowly through the group,
but it seems to hit a a critical mass at
some point and then it begins to uh
accelerate. The learning curve
accelerates and we can plot this. We can
watch it happen. So, and he also goes on
and maybe where he really started was
demonstrating that morphology, the the
the development of living organisms of
plants and animals,
our classic way of thinking about it is
that this is evolving in a genetic it
happens in a genetic determined fashion.
The DNA has the codes and it builds uh
it builds the organism. But there's a
wide range of phenomenon that doesn't
fit that that pattern. And Sheldrake has
shown that there seems to be a field
that informs how the bio biochemistry
uses the information that's available in
the DNA to build the organism that it's
building. So that there is a field
influence that influences the the
morphology, the the shape of things. And
so I'm just taking it one step further
to say that there is a field of
influence in the room that influences
all the individual minds in a room.
>> Yeah. And gives you a nice account as
you mentioned in a few of your books of
some kind of growth process, right?
Actually, going on which you also get in
Sheldrake. can see how because there's
learning and it spreads, you've got
something like an evolution on a diff
completely different level.
>> Yeah. I found for example that that
classes have a mind and so that the mind
of the class can influence the learning
of individuals within the class. So if
the mind of the class is coherent and
well focused and well energized, it can
accelerate and deepen the learning of
individuals. But I also discovered
from teaching over many years and
decades I discovered that there was a a
cognitive development taking place
across students across years as I taught
a course. So that uh there not only is a
class mind there is a course mind and
it's a kind of morphic field. It's a
field which is generated by all the
students who have gone through this
exercise of learning this particular
subject with the particular professor.
So just as the group mind influences the
individual, the group mind itself
evolves and becomes stronger and more
potentiated over the course of years. I
found that sometimes I'd start a course
which I knew was a winner. I had it had
gone through a real shakedown. I knew I
had I plot my learning curve and I come
to course the class on the first day and
in many different ways the students tell
me they're already on the fourth week of
the syllabus in their own mind. I don't
they don't want me to take them the long
way away around. They want to start
where they are and I have to revise the
syllabus in order to kind of tra stay in
true dialogue with where this group is.
>> And that was kind of shocking to me. uh
I had never even imagined that there was
a learning which transferred from
students to different students to
different students to different students
and what that learning is is the
learning of this subject matter in this
dance which contributes to a field and
that field is has a life of its own
which is larger than the individual
students in the room and it's larger
than me. It's kind of like a lake. You
have a lake and you have water coming in
at one end and water going out at the
other end of the lake. But we have
freshmen coming in and we have seniors
always leaving. So the student body is
always a constantly shifting field. But
there are fields of learning that emerge
inside that lake of the student body.
And those fields are dynamic and they're
powerful. Once you know that those
fields exist, then you can begin to
incorporate them in your teaching pra
practices. There are things that I do at
the beginning of the semester to open
the field and to open the link between
the class field and the course field.
And it's also important to close the
field at the end of the semester for all
the reasons I explain reasons in the
book. So once you know that these fields
exist, then it's a natural step if you
want to be an effective teacher to begin
to work with them in your teaching
protocols.
>> Yeah, I I [clears throat] I remember
reading that and it's it reminded me of
a very shamanic kind of concept, right?
The idea that you open and close um and
there's something um not quite so
visible, right? you you have to see the
evidence by how your students are
developing. They're not in one-to-one
contact with the previous students. So,
you can't give a natural
um common sense explanation such as you
know how people once they've seen one
person do a very fast running the mile
very quickly or playing some particular
difficult piece suddenly everybody can
do it because now they know it's
possible.
>> Yeah. But it's a slightly different one
because in this case you can see ah it's
possible somebody can do it. So if I
just do it enough, I can do it. In your
case, there's an invisibility to it.
It's again at the suble the subtle
channel level, right?
>> But there's still evidence. There's
still visible evidence which is
interesting.
>> It's there's an invisibility to it. But
it manifests empirical phenomenon which
we can plot and track and examine to see
whether what this apparent or seeming
evidence suggests. Is it simply a
mistake? Am I just being confused and
I'm seeing a relation where there is no
relation or actually do we get tangible
results that make best
an understanding if we interpret it in
terms of field dynamics of mind? Yeah,
this is the interesting thing and we'll
go to life cycles now because
you know one of the things you um find
is especially with people like Ian
Stevenson and Jung is that there they
would call themselves empiricists right
they don't believe because they just
have faith or anything they believe
because they amount they've amassed
masses of data and they're just being
scientists that's what scientists are
supposed to do right so I mean on the
life cycles book which is Um it's a
particularly clearly written book for
your first book especially. I found I
find it one of the best books on the
topic actually. Um so I mean how did had
you met Ian Stevenson and then you sort
of decided to go down this topic or were
you already thinking about these things
and how did you get into the topic in
the first place?
>> Well, you know I I finished graduate
school [clears throat]
as a agnostic an atheistically inclined
agnostic. I kind of you know I started
the whole evolutionary journey from New
Testament criticism, biblical studies
into medieval theology and then into the
reformation era of focus on scripture
and then in the modern mind and it's
emergence of science and uh the social
scientific critique of religion. I
finished my graduate experience just
absolutely agnostic.
Um and then I met the work of two people
changed my thinking on this. The first
was Ian Stevenson, University of
Virginia who studies children all around
the world, little children who have
spontaneous memories of having lived a
previous life and they are able to name
names, name places. They are able when
they are brought back to the life place
of the first personality, they can
identify people. They can they can
trigger memories of who they were in
relationship and specific events that
happened between the people. They know
their way around towns they've never
been in before. Just an overwhelming
body of evidence. And he convinced me in
his book 20 cases suggestive of
reincarnation that there was
reincarnation is just a fact of life. we
have the evidence and that the body of
evidence has grown not only because Ian
Stevenson's work can has continued to
grow but there's other bodies of
evidence from past life therapy there's
lots of converging bodies of evidence
and what I do in life cycles is I start
off with the simple chapter where I
gather the evidence the representative
evidence and present the cases and the
evidence that has convinced me that
reincarnation is simply true
that doesn't mean that Stevenson
understands how it works and he doesn't
understand necessarily the the
implications of that worldview for
understanding of cosmology.
But it really it it convinced me that
everything that I had studied through
all of college and graduate school on
this score was incomplete and
inadequate. I had to erase my
intellectual blackboard and start from
scratch. So I began to really think
about if reincarnation is true, what
does it mean? What does it tell us about
identity? What does it tell us about
family? Does it change how we treat our
family? Uh does it change uh how we
think about uh Christianity? The largest
chapter in the book is a book on
Christianity and reincarnation. So it's
just trying to work out with my students
the various implications of this very
powerful body of data that reincarnation
is true. Now it doesn't mean we don't
know anything about the physics of
rebirth. We don't know anything about
the physics of the soul except that
maybe it's light. We don't really know
how learning leaves the body when the
body dies and how it maintains its
integrity uh when there is no physical
substrate. We don't know how it encodes
itself in subsequent incarnations.
There's so much we don't know. Uh we'll
I'm sure we'll make progress in the
future, but we have to start thinking in
a non-reductive metaphysical way and
before we can make that progress.
>> Yeah, I agree. And the barrier doesn't I
[clears throat] mean, as you sort of
suggest there, the barrier doesn't
necessarily have to be um materialism
even because we literally don't know. I
mean there might be some strange
mechanism that is what we would call
material like DNA is the encoding device
for doing this and there's a almost a
computer version we have no idea the
blockage seems to be
>> that that may be part of I'm sure it is
part of the process but if there is any
time period between the death of one
life and the birth of another life
that's where we have good reasons for
think that there's a causal continuity
if there's any interval
Then that tells us that the universe
must be configured in such a way that
consciousness can maintain its integrity
independent of a physical brain,
independent of DNA, independent of any
of the physiological mechanisms.
>> Yeah, that's
it should be part of how it leaves and
how it enters, but it it but there has
to be some capacity of consciousness to
maintain its integrity. And this all
really hinges on a really simple
principle. What we are discovering is
that our mind is older than our body.
And the classically thinking our mind
shouldn't be older than our body because
our mind is created by the fixed six
senses and our our physical organism.
But over and over again we're finding
that our mind is older than our body.
And once you stop, once you open up to
this possibility that the learning that
is manifesting in a human being is a
learning that didn't begin in this
incarnation, it develops with this
incarnation and it doesn't stop with the
end of this incarnation. That it's a
long developmental trajectory. Then
suddenly all sorts of things begin to
make more sense.
Why some children seem wise beyond their
years and then some adults are still
little kids. You know, it's like soul
age and that's a metaphor for soul
maturity is not the same as physical age
or even psychological age. It's just
that there are some children who have
many many incarnations that are
informing their sensitivities and their
interests and passions. And there are
grown adults who are like, you know,
Uncle Lou, you don't ever want to let
Uncle Louie play with the fireworks with
the children because Uncle Lou is not
he's just a kid. He's just another kid
in in in an older body. And things begin
to make more sense when you understand
that there's a continuity behind it all.
>> Yeah. And I think it's I mean if you
take the evidence seriously, it's pretty
much incontrovertible, right, that it's
going on. It's so solid.
>> Now, [snorts] I couldn't convince my
colleagues in my department of
philosophy and religious studies that
that's the case, but I think that's
because they're already committed to an
alternative paradigm. and they don't
want to look at the evidence and they
don't look at the evidence.
>> Like this is this is the point, right?
The uh the worldview is the worldview
wants to say we would see the evidence
if it were there but there's a
possibility screen uh sort of
constraining function that their
worldview has which means they're not
willing to look at it. So the evidence
is all around but they are just not
willing to see it as evidence. And then
once you open your world view, well then
you can start going looking for all
kinds of other kinds of phenomena,
right?
>> You are not you're blocking yourself
off. I mean, how do you how do you get
around this problem? Because all that's
going to be said and what is said is
that it's fraud, right?
>> It's there's some kind of collusion or
it's fraud. How do you get around it?
Well, basically the people who are
making that claim, it's one thing to
claim fraud, it's another thing to prove
it. And Stephvenson has been accused of
fraud. He's been accused of doing bad
research, but it hasn't been proven. He,
you know, he has stood up to his
critics. So, you basically, you have to
go to the to the issue, go to the mat
and look at the details of the protocol.
uh is this solid research or is it just
you know nonsense and I think
Stephvenson and other past life
therapist and other researchers into
reincarnation I think have been well
trained they have good degrees they have
they have clearly demonstrated uh good
methodologies in in what they're doing
and people who are claiming it's just
fraud or sloppy research that's what the
old paradigm says as when they just
don't want to open up the possibility
that they might be wrong because if
they're wrong about this, that's a
serious thing to be wrong about and they
just will throw up all sorts of smoke
screens rather than look at this
evidence seriously. And that's why I
don't really try to convince my
colleagues because they've already got
PhDs and they're convinced that they
know what's what than a younger
generation, you know, it's it's paradigm
shift is a generational thing. Um if if
old scholars or holders of the old way
of thinking die and younger scholars
coming in who are open to new ideas come
in and they test the ideas not
uncritically but with more openness to
possible outcomes. So it's a
generational thing.
>> Yeah, I think it was Max play. 90% of my
students when they're when they're given
the opportunity to look at the evidence
and make up their own mind, they find
the evidence overwhelming and
convincing.
>> There's a a quote from Max Plank, which
is that scientific revolution happens
when the old ones die. [laughter]
>> Yeah, that's true. But I mean but it is
true though that ultim I mean it's so
heavily significant that ultimately you
need an experience in order to really
shift stubborn cases. I was a stubborn
case and had an experience eventually
but I'm interested that you're you were
convinced by the literature it seems or
or did you have some other experiences?
You must have still been
>> not yet not at the time. I was convinced
by the rigor of Stevenson's research. I
mean, his books are kind of boring to
read because he thinks like a lawyer.
For every piece of evidence, he
documents who he learned that piece of
evidence from and who verified the
evidence. I mean, he they're boring.
They're they're like legal thesis. Uh,
and but it's very powerful presentation
of very powerful data. He knows that he
knows that he's going against the grain
and he tries to do it as carefully as he
can. uh I just was really convinced that
that was the case. And now later about 5
years later I did my own self-incquiry
with about three years of past life
therapy work with hypnotic regression
type of stuff. I don't hypnotic people
have all sorts of miscellaneous and bad
ideas about what hypnosis is and hyper
suggestability in the condition. It's
it's really more just sustained inwardly
focused meditation inwardly focused
attention. And so I worked with somebody
for three years and I dug out some of my
former lives and I worked with them and
worked on healing them what was left
because healing because some of the
pains that were left over in their lives
were now alive in my life. And I also
want to mention I don't for your
audience I don't want to this to be seen
as a linear thing. It's not like life
one influences two influences three
which influences four. It's much more
subtle than that. It's like a It's like
if you have a deck of 52 cards or 52
former lives only you're only playing
with a hand of a small number of those
cards. So I may have had 52 lives but
only maybe five or six or 10 of those
lives are relevant or influencing this
particular life. You see, so it's it's a
you know, I may be influenced primarily
by a life that took place three
centuries ago, whereas the life that
took place in the 19th century is not a
major influence on my present life. So
we have to approach it with this really
open-ended inquiry. What are the
patterns here? And you might
>> when you have personal experience of
your own history, it certainly deepens
uh it deepens your conviction
>> and you might be um also interacting
with your own parallel incarnations. I
mean if you're interested in um
numerology
um so in Pythagorean numerology the idea
is that each name has a frequency that
describes its life patterns and its
fate. So you are identical to Ian
Stevenson. You're both 49,
>> which is also a number of Pythagoras
himself, by the way. So, you are sort of
matched by uh by the numerology whether
you liked it or not. That's interesting.
But the other person, and I met Ian
Stevenson's work when I just was
beginning my academic career, but the
other person I met at the very beginning
of my academic career was uh Stan Grath.
And I read his book, Realms of the Human
Unconscious, his first book, which had
just been published a few years. And
this is a long time ago. I mean, I I
started teaching when I was in 1978.
Uh, so I'm an old dog now at this point.
But then I read Stan's book and he had
this methodology. He had already been
doing this work for over 15 years. He
had a methodology. He had worked with
hundreds of clients. uh he had worked
with himself and other professionals
exploring the therapeutic applications
of psychedelics particularly LSD and
they were doing this in a
non-controversial way research at a
medical school in Czechoslovakia in
dialogue with other research uh
psychiatrist in other medical schools
and institutions in Europe and they were
not having the same convulsive
experience with psychedelics that we had
in the 60s. um it was a much more
methodical
professional
exploration of uh among in the
psychological and psychiatric community.
>> Yeah.
>> I mean it's interesting in the mind it's
interesting that you found exactly these
two people because they are the most
methodical rigorous of all of the people
that you could have met in these two
what are still far out subjects. Right.
So you were put in touch with exactly
the correct ones. I was impressed with
the rigor of their thinking, the
scholarship that was involved and that
scholarship just kept showing itself in
Stan's writing book after book after
book. I mean he just is a a tremendous
encyclopedic knowledge uh and you know
foremost in his field in that way. And
so I I became convinced that if what he
was saying is true, it had profound
implications not only for psychology but
also for my discipline which was
philosophy of religion. And I became
convinced that the people who would make
the largest contribution to my
discipline would be those soon who would
be able to be writing out of an
experiential basis refined by intellect,
not simply an intellectual basis. And so
I began early in that time in 1979
a process of working with psychedelics
in a very systematic way using Stan
Gross protocol which means I'm not going
to a Grateful Dead concert. Every you're
working in a room quiet separate from
the world protected from the world.
You're lying down. You're wearing eye
shades. You're wearing headphones.
You're listening to very carefully
curated music to support the opening and
the contracting of consciousness over a
psychedelic journey. Uh and then you
document you you make careful notes as
soon as you know the next day within 24
hours. And I began what became
eventually a 20-year journey. So between
when I was 30 at the beginning of my
career and when I was 50 farther along
in my career, I did 73 highdosese LSD
therapeutically structured LSD sessions,
right? And I did it not as a a
clinician, not as a therapist, not
trying to heal. I did it as a
philosopher to try to explore the
potential of these amplifying medicines.
is all I think of psychedelics in
general as amplifiers of consciousness.
And if you use this amplified state in a
very critical way, you enter into a
deepening and ever deepening communion
and engagement with the deeper levels of
the mind and through that the deeper
levels of existence itself. And after I
finished that work in 1999,
I took another 20 years to think about
it, to digest it, to really ponder it
and put the pieces together before
publishing LSD in the mind of the
universe. So it really that book
represents a 40-year
project, 20 years of experiential
exploration and then 20 years of
intellectual assimilation.
>> Yeah. Well, 73 just to go numerological
again is 10 numerological. So it's a
completion had to be 10. You see I I had
um Peter Hostet Hughes on last week
who's part of this mind at large project
in England and he was telling me about
um this earlier attempt to do something
like what you did yourself. It was
called project outsight and it was the
idea of trying to get philosophers and
big thinkers including people like Kurt
Girdle and others to take LSD to take
psychedelics to explore the uh the inner
spaces and sort of do philosophy on LSD
and Peter calls them gateway drugs to
metaphysics which is basically what you
were doing right you were sort of going
into metaphysics in what ends up being
something like the old way. So obviously
one of the views we have of the
initiates like Palmenades and Platinus
and people like this is that they were
doing the mysteries. They were mysterit
the mysteries which so far as we know
involved the kaikon which seems to have
been a psychedelic. So it's an
interesting thing to think about which
is that we we often have problems
thinking about Palmenades's view of time
and change and whatnot but it's entirely
possible that he was describing a
psychedelic experience and he even talks
about meeting the goddess which you do
in your books. So the reason we might be
struggling so much is that we're trying
to bring what was his experience of this
other domain where time works
differently and change works differently
and trying to bring them into this
domain here. Likewise platinus and Plato
with his forms even where they're going
into this timeless realm. We might have
got it entirely wrong the history of
western philosophy.
>> Yeah, I really think psychedelics
are a turning point in western
philosophy. They really represent such
an enormous advance in how we do certain
fields of philosophy that there is the
work that was done before and work
that's done after. Now psychedelics
I differentiate three different ways in
which professional people or critical
people use psychedelics. The first is
for therapeutic healing and this is the
dominant this is what's taking all of
our attention right now in the
psychedelic renaissance is to
demonstrate the efficacy of various
psychedelics to address post-traumatic
stress disorder depression um death
anxiety so on so forth. It's really
important. This is where this is the
work that's bringing psychedelics back
into public discussion.
Second level uh topic is spiritual
awakening. overlapping but not the same.
Can psychedelics facilitate a quicker
and deeper opening into states of
consciousness that give us spiritual
insights? And this is deeper than simply
healing the wounds of your past. This is
deeper existential universal questions.
Is there meaning to existence? And be
able being able to kind of enter into
states that are well described in the
enlightenment traditions which is always
about right here right now penetrating
into the ever rich moment of the present
moment. Now most of the work in
psychedelics has basically uh at present
times focuses on one of these two. I
found that because I had adopted a very
extreme protocol. I worked with 500 to
600 micrograms every session which is
not a protocol that I recommend today. I
truly don't. It's what was I thinking
fills me with
>> it. Honestly, it fills me with that
anxiety horror to think that you did
that many after my own experiences.
Sorry, Carrier. It's a huge dose.
>> It helps when you have a real clear a
little clean protocol and you don't
allow a lot of distortions in. But uh
when I did what happened was I started
with an interest in spiritual awakening.
But the very power of the methodology
that I used was so great that it pushed
me beyond that after a few years and
took me into a an adventure that I now
describe as cosmological exploration.
This is different than personal healing.
It's different than spiritual awakening.
It's using this temporary state of
consciousness to
explore as deeply as possible the
structure of reality. The structure of
consciousness and the what you learn of
reality from these deep states of
consciousness. So to me I didn't try to
do philosophy while I was in the
psychedelic state. I the method I think
is to enter into this expanded
consciousness. Go as deep into it as you
can. Go through all the cycles of death
and rebirth that are required in the
purification processes.
Surrender to it completely. Let it take
you wherever it's going to take you. And
then you come back and then you record
it as precisely as you can, exactly as
you can. You wait and rest, assimilate,
and then months later you go back into
this expanded condition and you come
back and you record it and you document
it and you you look at the developmental
process of course many across many
sessions. Now ideally what you want to
have and we will have this one day is
you we don't want to have just one
person doing the work. We want to have
50 people doing the work with different
academic backgrounds or different
trainings but using a standardized
protocol so that we have 50 journeys
into the deep psyche. 50 journeys into
the cosmos coming back and then
recording their experiences. And then we
put all of let's say we did this once a
month for a year or for two years. Then
we put all of their experiences, their
records on the table and we look at them
all simultaneously and we can try to
find out which are the pieces which are
which are idiosyncratic and what are the
pieces of the common ground because
clearly the common ground is the most
likely the strongest epistemological
evidence for this being something real.
Uh we're not there yet. we're kind of
informally moving there, but it hasn't
been formalized as an investigative
protocol, but it will be. And I thought
of think of my work as a step
trying to open that door for my
colleagues. I didn't I don't like being
doing something that's illegal. I did it
because I believe that the laws in this
case were wrong and I wasn't able to
enlist a lot of colleagues in this
because of where I was living and what I
was doing. But I tried to do a research
project with as much discipline and
precision as I could
and I think it it yielded some very
interesting results.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. I mean it was [clears throat] like
you sort of went went in with um a need
to rapidly gain old knowledge a lot of
knowledge by going through a lot of
cycles of life because what you describe
and I say quickly in quotes because it's
not quickly when you're in there right
it's eternity you go in for many for
eternities each time basically but what
you are able to do almost like a a form
of time travel is or a time chamber it's
comp you know the the time runs more
slowly here compared to there. So you
can do more when go by going into the
psychedelic state you are capable of
doing more phil philosophical work than
if you stayed in this sort of earthly
time scale.
>> Yeah. When you stay in the earthly time
scale you have to work you're working
intellectually. You basically assimilate
a lot of ideas. You extrapolate put
things together and you draw inferences.
This is a different way of doing
philosophy. The first protocol, the
first thing you do is expand your
experience
and then you refine your experience with
intellect and all the things that
philosophers do. But the first protocol
is to expand your experience. All right?
So, and that's that's what makes it
that's the difference between ordinary
philosophy and what I would call
psychedelic philosophy. It's a different
philosophical protocol, right?
>> Yeah. Yeah, I mean I think we're making
this transition. We are crossing the
threshold cuz the next 5 years, 10
years, a hundred years, we are doing
psychedelics and we're we're we'll we'll
make mistakes and people are using them
irresponsibly. Maybe, maybe. Yeah. Yeah.
But a lot of people are using them very
responsibly and very diligently and
we're beginning to harvest some of the
insights that are emerging in different
disciplines. And so, uh, this we're
watching the whole species
>> migrate into a a refined use of
psychedelics in different disciplines.
Yeah.
>> Because we know Silicon Valley uses
them, right? And they've been very
productive in their use of them.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. I mean one of the um objections it
will face and it has faced I think even
Michael Polland mentions this that it's
um there's a difference between
experience and reality and the the idea
is that you're just having experience
but you're not connecting to reality. I
mean what I mean going back to
metaphysical assumptions that you bring
to it. If you believe that that that
only the physical world is that's the
only world that exists, then you're
going to call these substances
hallucinations because they allow you to
see things which are not there. And
that's the old paradigm trying to deal
with these mind openers. U but it's an
it's an interesting question. How can we
validate these experiences? Is it
possible to validate them? We try the
way we validate other experiences. And
it is a it is an interesting project and
there are validation processes.
Sometimes you learn things in these
experiences that you never knew before
and [snorts] you can later verify that
they are true. Sometimes you learn that
there are actions taking place across
the country and you're able to verify
that those actions truly did take place.
Sometimes it's a matter of
crossverification.
Sometimes it's a matter of different
people
encountering the same psychological
object you might say or the same, you
know, experiential object in these
states. So that you get
crossverification
of these experiences. It's the same
thing that happens when you people had
near-death experiences when they first
started being popularized after Raymond
Moody's work and a lot of the medical
community said, "Oh, they're just having
experiences. They're not experiencing
reality." Even though the people kept
telling him, listen, this is more real
than physical reality. I'm telling you,
it's real. No, they're not going to pay
any attention to that. Thousands and
thousands and thousands of people now
have recorded these near-death
experiences, and there's been such a
convergence. They are basically seeing
the same phenomena that incred that
increases the credibility that they are
experiencing something real.
It's certainly something objective. I
mean, one way of viewing it is why do we
assume that this world is real? Well,
because we have a systematic sharing of
features, right? That's where the
objectivity comes from.
>> Mathematicians, really good
mathematicians often talk about um
Plutonia, the mathematical space being
as real as this place because they're
encountering the same mathematical
structures. You can bump into them and
not get around certain things in that
space.
So there's precedent for thinking of
reality in terms of objectivity in this
way. And I agree that it does seem to be
the case especially with um all of these
recent um examinations of beings on
Iawaska. I'm thinking of Andrew
Galimmore's kind of work
>> where it's sort of the same beings each
time. I'll mention my my own case. I had
no idea about all of the myths to do
with jesters. The first time I had LSD,
I would inevitably take on the persona
every time of a jester and see
everything in jester terms. I had no
idea that this was a thing, that this
was some common um
>> structure that was observed. So, and
likewise with the NDEs, people have no
idea about a lot of the stuff that
they're experiencing. They don't have a
background that's inculturated them or
anything like that. And yet there's the
common commonality.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
Um now one of the things I found
interesting with your life cycles book
just to stay there for a second is
>> you had a a view of spacetime. So the
idea was okay so let's accept that these
experiences are veridical and people
have past lives. What does the world
have to be like metaphysically in order
for that to occur? And you come up with
a nice model of spacetime which is very
interesting. similar model of spacetime.
I've spoken to Jeff Triple about a very
similar one. Lots of people who have had
NDEs or
um psychedelic experiences have the same
kind of thing where there are
essentially two levels. There's an
eternal timeless level which doesn't go
on forever. It's just literally there's
no time there and then there's this one
which is has time. I mean, so do you
still have that view and was it impacted
by your LSD experiences that you then
went on to do? Did you have find it
verified or were you able to experience
it what you only theorized previously?
>> Well [clears throat] actually I don't
hold that particular view. I mean I
understand it and I affirm it but I hold
a kind of a more complex and subtle
view. I don't think it's that spaceime I
mean physical reality space-time reality
is linear and that's the way time flows
chronologically linearly and then out
space outside spaceime it's eternity
it's non-time
um I think in between linear time and
non-time
there are many gradations on the
spectrum of time there are many patterns
on time and this kind of like In some
ways, you see in in the Buddhist
understanding of their cosmology, you
don't simply go from spaceime
into infinite consciousness. There are
many many gradations in what they call
the Bardau, the intermediate states
between linear physical spaceime and
infinite consciousness. And that's my
experience with time too that that's why
I developed the concept in know just in
order to language the experiences of
deep time. My on my 11th session after a
very very intense purification process I
had my first experience of transcending
linear time. But it didn't take the form
of timelessness.
I what it did was for one year for seven
sessions in one year I kept coming back
into the same platform and I experienced
my entire life from beginning to end as
simultaneously present now. Mhm.
>> It was like my entire life was a tree
and my most recent experiences were the
leaves at the tips of the trees and all
the things that I had spent my life
working on and being concerned with and
engaging were the big trunk and the and
the big branches rolling out to the
tree. But I experienced myself
I experienced the distilled essence of
Chris Bash strewn [snorts] out over time
as simultaneously present. I experienced
what it's like what it was like what to
be old to be old Chris Bash. uh that
doesn't mean I saw every detail of my
life but I experienced the totality of
my life and it was very clarifying
experience because as a young man I was
what I was about 32 at this age as a
young man it clarified for me what my
life project was it showed me I saw my
life project
u later when I went deeper into deep
time and I had gone through more levels
of death and rebirth. I began to move
into uh the species mind. I began to
experience
time in terms of something like a
10,000year increment. I could experience
the development, the evolution of our
species over a huge time frame. I
experienced later
dimensions of time beyond the 10,000year
sweep. And I have no idea how this is
possible. There's only one physicist
I've had conversations with whose way of
doing physics allows the possibility
that there are different time modalities
and different dimensions of physical of
of the universe. Uh but I know that my
experience of time was veritical.
I believe it was vertical. Let's say
that it's easier and and it's different
dimensions. I also have experienced
timelessness.
uh but timelessness is a very refined
state and it much more common I think
are various dimens experiences of time
dilation
which is not the same as timelessness
but there are many variations there and
I think that ultimately
if you go deep enough and far out enough
you move into increasing subtle and
subtler and subtler dimensions and then
you transcend radically
some of the um superructure the
structure of time and of time space
reality. Yeah.
>> Was is the physicist Carla Relli by any
chance?
>> It's Bernard Carr.
>> Oh, yes. I know. I know.
>> Um yeah, I mean there are many people
that have this kind of view. I've
written about it myself. A similar kind
of view.
>> Um
>> I'm sure there are. That's Bernard's the
only one that I happen to have met.
Yeah.
>> Yeah. And and what you can see from
this, I mean, often when you go out into
the outside of time state, there is an
inevitability about the whole thing that
you don't see when you're immersed in
it. And you can also see the necessity
of immers of immersion
um into time because you don't have the
experience otherwise. Immersion in a
slightly low at a lower dimension is the
only way you can go through time without
knowing what's going to happen next and
have the learning experience. So, it's
almost there's a necessity involved in
having the high one and the lower one is
what one thing I found.
>> Um,
>> it's like when you're in a plane flying
over the country at night and you can
see with great beauty the majesty and
the organization of cities, but if you
want to have a human experience, you
have to get down on the street.
>> Yep. And you know, if we view the the uh
less temporal experience as something
godlike, well, they're missing out,
right? They're missing out on the
transients and all of these features of
human life that make it what it is. You
can get things being here that you can't
get no matter how fully you can see the
full picture. You just can't sort of ex
have experience there. the same kind of
experience.
>> One individuality, two fundamental
complimentary truths.
>> Yeah, it reminds me a bit what you're
saying um also of David Bow's
distinction between the unfolded order
and the unfolded order where the
unfolded order it still has a kind of
process in it, but it's not a temporal
process. It's not time. In order to get
time, you have to unfold this thing into
time and space. And it's a sort of
projection out from it.
>> And I was quite interested in um you
know most people immediately go to
quantum mechanics for the physics
analogy, but what you've used from very
early on I think even in life cycles I
saw elements of it is the theory of
complex systems and collective phenomena
and the theory of critical phenomena and
these kinds of things. How did you sort
of get led into this particular
approach?
>> Well, again, [clears throat]
quantum thinking fascinates me, but I'm
not a quantum physicist and I'm not a
physicist, so I really try to stay on my
in my lane. U but the connective tissue
of life is something that we can
experience uh if we really just pay
attention. Um, and especially I mean
you can experience if you really study
the literature in past life therapy, you
begin to see the connective tissue that
connects lives in this incarnation. That
relationships in this incarnation have
history. Not just individuals have
history, but relationships have history.
And that tends to give you a feeling of
of connectivity that persists through
time. But when you go into psychedelic
states then it just becomes
overwhelmingly obvious uh that you begin
to see patterns of connectivity. You
some people see them in nature. Um I
have spent a lot of time exploring
patterns of connectivity in the human
species. So much so that I've come to at
some experiences have been so deep and
so rich that I I came to experience the
entire human family as a single organism
and that individual persons were like
cells in this organism and individual
minds were like sparks within the light
of this organism. and these and once we
you know we can open up to fractal
theory all sorts of different
developments to support these ideas if
if they need support but experientially
um the connectivity of of life was just
overwhelming and of course the same
thing you find in Buddhism one of the
four core fundamental insights of
Buddhism is that no one has their
existence by itself so independent
Existence is a myth. It's just an
illusion. What happens is everything
arises in interconnection with
everything else. There's we don't have a
mind without the people's minds around
us with all the people who have written
the books for us, who taught us, who
help us. Our entire experience of
ourselves is a created [snorts]
is a group process.
Within that group interconnectedness,
there is an individuality that's
learning individual lessons, acquiring
and developing individual strengths. But
the matrix within which that is taking
place is the truth of
interconnectedness. And now ecologists
are teaching us that there is no animal
or no organism in nature which can exist
independent of the surrounding organisms
and the systems of those organisms. So
that that just becomes repeatedly
uh a fundamental truth of
interconnectivity that operates at
multiple levels.
>> Yeah. I mean one of the other things
that's very apparent from your first
book to the last book is uh which
relates to this is the problem of one
and many which is sort of the
fundamental problem for me and I think
it's a fundamental problem for you.
Complexity science tends to at least
grapple with this because it says
there's both right. There's the one and
the many. And my favorite example of
this, which you might like, is the slime
mold. So, what's interesting about the
slime mold is that it spends most of its
time as one unit. when when when times
are good and it needs to explore well it
splits into independent cells and they
can go and explore further reaches and
do it faster and they can gather
information alone but then they come
back and it's almost like an
assimilation of the information into the
greater unit again. So you need it sort
of solves very naturally the problem of
the one and the many which is it's but
it's both you can and both are
>> is doing something similar he's saying
every individual is connected to the
species and as the individual learns the
species learns and that's just a subset
of the one and the many issue.
>> Yeah. So I think it's just you we just
have to let go of certain static
categories
uh to begin to see that inner
penetrating quality.
>> Yeah. And you might view the oversoul in
a similar fashion, right? And your
various incarnations as this oversoul
which is like the unit, it can only do
so much and it if it sees things too
well as in the aeroplane from above,
well, it can't learn as much. So you
descend into these incarnations, go and
explore with your own apparent
independence and then have to sort of
emerge back uh come back into the hole.
>> The oversoul is what you might think of
as the 100,000year intelligence. It
gathers all the mega intelligence. Our
individual incarnation is the
hundred-year intelligence. And
eventually it, you know, we return to
the soul. We bring everything that we've
learned back to the to the hive, back to
the soul. And the soul has an
individuality that incorporates and
empowers and transcends all the
individual lives that have contributed
to it. And it it's subtle because you
know
I think for example when we meet
somebody when someone meets somebody who
has died, let me give it just to give an
example. My father died when I was 18.
Okay. So, I hope sometime when I die, I
hope I get to see dad again. It'd be
nice to see dad again.
Now, my understanding is that when my
dad died, he went back into his soul and
he he has a dual identity. You might say
the individual identity is my dad, but
he has that soul identity of that which
my dad came from and returned to. Now,
if I meet my dad,
I think what happens is I meet the soul
being, but he's wearing the face of my
dad because that's who I knew him as.
>> But then with more time, then it stops
being Chris meeting Chris's dad. It
becomes
his dad's soul meeting Chris's soul and
it becomes a soulto- soul communion. And
I think this can happen even if my dad's
soul has sent down some of its energy
into an incarnation before I die.
Because even if that incarn the soul
it's a huge entity sends some of its
energy to incarnate again
it still carries the memory of my dad.
So I even if quote my dad has incarnated
that's even not the right way to think
about it. My dad's soul has sent a part
of its energy to incarnate. The whole
soul never incarnates to in totality.
You know, it's just pieces of the soul.
I would still be able to experience my
dad when I die. Uh and then we would
deepen into a soulto soul kind of
communion.
>> There's um there's an interesting remark
that uh Jung makes in his
um mysterium kyunionis book, right? his
last book. Um, which relates also, I
think, to the problem of the one and the
many, which is this this idea that the
most fundamental archetype, the one
that's causing him most [sighs]
uh vexation is the parasympathetic and
the sympathetic
um archetypes. And there's something
interesting in in that archetype because
it sort of can be mapped onto the one
and the many, right? There's the this
desire to be separate which is sort of
fear and then there's the desire you
know to and that's the desire to run and
be independent and then there's the the
other system right which wants you to
connect and join and merge
>> I wonder if you've given any thought to
sort of this idea that there's this at
root there's this sort of deep
archetypal structure that generates our
moves here and where we want to
individuate but then there's is also
this other pressure that wants us to
pull back. It's almost like a love and
fear rather than love and hate um idea
at the center of the cosmos.
>> You know, I don't I I understand and I'm
sure that that's true and we can we can
explore these pushpulls of the human
dynamics, but I don't have the same
starting point as Jung did. Um in my
there is u a chapter in LSD in the mind
of the universe on archetypal reality
and I experience archetypes somewhat
differently than Jung experienced it. I
don't I don't challenge the reality that
he sensitized us to but when I entered
into archetypal reality I didn't
experience what Jung saw as archetypes.
And so I tend not to think that way. I
experienced sort of two different levels
of archetypes. One of them you might
think of as platonic a higher platonic
archetypes and then more of a yungian
archetype. But I still didn't experience
what Jung saw. I didn't experience the
wise old man, you know, wise old woman,
jester, you know, trickster, so on so
forth. What I experienced was at that
lower level I experienced the entire
human family as a single organism
and that there is a living and breathing
and thinking and feeling that runs
through this organism. These are kind of
like the deep currents of blood that
flows in our body that carries the
chemicals that nourish all the cells at
every part of our body. There are deep
currents that run throughout the living
organisms of the species mind. So I talk
about the species mind a lot in my
experience and I talk about how uh our
experience of the challenges that each
individual faces in life are drawn from
a collective web and our solutions feed
back into the collective web. So I I
experienced a lot of uh synchronicity, a
lot of deeper structure, intentionality,
but it wasn't in these kind of I didn't
focus on particular archetypes. It was
more like underneath our individual
existence. It was patently obvious that
we are all in a sense floating within an
ocean of consciousness. And that ocean
of consciousness is highly uh refined.
It's highly striated. It's highly u
differentiated at different levels. And
we exist within the matrix of that
collective psyche.
>> When I went deeper, I experienced what I
would call platonic archetypes. That is
the archetypes
which are the archetypes that actually
give birth to time and space and give
birth to some of the fundamental
structures within time and space. And
when I experienced them, I experienced
them as absolutely vast, beyond my
ability to comprehend. They were just
enormous. U and the best my mind could
do is that I saw them like galaxies
spinning slowly in space, vast. And we
we have an understanding of how vast a
galaxy is, just billions of light years
across.
I could not wrap my mind around those
things. They were but they were not
static. They were not Plato's concept of
an archetype of eternal ideas in the
mind of an unchanging god. They were
living dynamic forces but they they
lived on a completely different tier of
time. Their movement was completely
magisterially
larger than the the speed with which we
were living within time.
After several experiences of them, it
was profoundly uh moving, totally
educational
and I never was able to concretize them
into particular forms. But even when I
went into the collective mind, it's kind
of the more yungian unconscious kind of
thing, I didn't experience it in terms
of as Jung experienced it. So I've never
felt the need to address some of the
questions that Jung addressed, you know,
how these archetypes work and
interbalance. I just kind of fell into
the uh the coherence
the the field quality of mind that uh
it's like individual mind flow arises
from and flows back into and through the
net of collective mind and then I
learned also eventually
I reached a point
moving beyond even archetypal reality
ity when I had the experience of the
entire
history, the entire collective psyche
and everything that composes is composed
in the collective psyche fell away from
me. When you go through ego death, your
entire ego is shattered and it falls
away from you.
When you go through species death, your
entire history as a human being and
everything associated with humanity
falls away. Then and with that all the
religions of the world, all the
philosophies, all the thought forms, all
the gods and goddesses and deities, they
just fell away. And I experienced
consciousness in a completely
unprecedentedly clear fashion devoid of
all the structures that had been
informing my consciousness through the
collective psyche. So the collective
psyche for me and the archetypal themes
of the collective psyche are not in any
way the end point of the journey but
they are simply an organizational
pattern of this particular species in
time and there are deeper organizational
patterns that are much more fundamental
um than those which are giving birth to
this species. H
I mean it's possible that the growth
protocol was helping a little bit with
that with allowing you to get beyond
those more basic archetypes, right?
Because young archetypes they require
form and usually you're seeing the
archetype in something with form. But if
you're going beyond the revel of, you
know, the level of your experience being
informed by things like tricksters and
so on, you're naturally going to be
outside of that by the protocol itself.
So it might be playing a stronger role
than than I realized.
>> Yeah. It's just it it it again the same
power which opens up your personal mind
and lets your personal traumas surface
so that you can heal them and then opens
up a deeper level and opens you into the
collective mind. It's the same
amplifying power which if you
concentrate it and hold it firmly it can
melt eventually even your species mind
and you die out of the species into this
still deeper level of mind. So it it I
think that's one of the reasons
psychedelics represents such an
extraordinary opportunity because it
gives us the opportunity to step outside
of ourselves,
>> step outside of our ego, step outside of
our species, step into the species, step
out of the species, step into, you know,
these different levels. And when you
come back after those type deep
transcendent experiences,
then you see the dance of everything
around you. The individual dance and the
archetypal dance and all those things
moving around. You see them more clearly
as part of the complexity of the
manifestation of life
inside time and space and surrounding
time and space. But it's not it is not
an ultimate system. The gods and
goddesses are not an ultimate system.
They are a level of reality
and there are levels of reality beyond
them.
>> I know that that type of talk can get
you burned in earlier centuries.
Fortunately, I don't live in an earlier
century. [laughter]
>> No, I agree. I mean, Young's later work
on archetypes, I think, would agree with
you. the whole I mean in his later work
he's saying the archetype has no form
itself right it's the thing that gives
form and we can view it however we like
per
>> say in itself
>> yeah um I mean what you've just said
there leads us I suppose onto a nice uh
finishing question to do with the future
so I mean you mention in your book as
well that psychedelics have the power to
um unravel and transform culture and
that sort of sounds good and bad at the
same time right it's What gives people
fear about psychedelics is as you know
from your own experiences you you can
really unravel yourself and transform
yourself in radical ways and if we're
talking about culture then people will
have a fear about what the next thing is
and you've got you know your notion of
what the future human is. So I mean what
how would you sort of assuage the fears?
How do you transition to something
genuinely novel without just collapsing
everything and collapsing good things?
How how's how is it supposed to occur?
And
>> if we're talking about the future human,
we're talking about an evolutionary
sequence. We're talking about something
which is taking place inside time and
space. So we're not talking about
something outside the system. So we're
looking at the patterns within the
system and understanding what's
happening. And this completely I was
completely unprepared when these things
started to open up in my psychedelic
sessions. I had no idea that this was
even possible. Uh but I began to over a
number of years I received a number of
visionary inputs that began to cohhere
into a spe a telling story of the human
story. [clears throat]
visions that were telling me that
humanity was coming to a critical time
in its evolutionary development, that we
were entering a before and after time,
that we were entering a time of
tremendous spiritual breakthrough. Uh
that this was something that had been in
the works for hundreds of thousands of
years, we were after climbing this long
hard mountain, we were just about to
cover the crest of a hill and enter a
sundrenched valley. So there was lots
and lots of positive uh indications that
humanity was on the cusp of a major
collective breakthrough and it wasn't
personal. It wasn't an individual. It
was a the entire species and I had
experiences
of the entire species as a single
organism that was moving deliberately in
this process.
But [clears throat] nowhere
had did it tell me in this several year
time frame and this was starting in like
between 91 to 94 at this point. So this
is a long time ago now. It it never
explained to me how nature was going to
pull this off. I mean I looked around. I
didn't see us going into a particularly
spiritually eruptive period, you know,
quantum jump spirituality.
Uh but then in 1995
I was taken deep I dissolved deeply into
the species mind. I was taken deep into
deep time and I had this experience that
changed my understanding of the human
story deeply
in my frame of reference. I experienced
the death and rebirth of humanity. I
experienced a period of history and
again deep time not linear time but deep
time I experienced humanity. I had like
merged with the human family and I
experienced us in a period of falling
apart, a period of collapse, a cascading
series of ecological crises bearing upon
us, ramifications and a destructuring of
culture, a loss of reference points, uh
a loss of certainty. Um, basically there
was just a radical profound unraveling
of the the patterns of society and of
culture to the point that it looked like
we were entering a deathic spiral that
there was no getting out of this. We
were going to die as a species like a
hurricane coming across a island in the
Pacific Ocean. We just eventually we
were reduced to simply grabbing onto a
log and trying to survive.
But then
the storm passed
and there were still many of us alive.
And when we picked ourselves up and when
we began to reconnect with people, we
were changed. This deep historical
crisis had changed us at the core of our
being. It allowed us to reach deeper
into ourselves than we had ever allowed
ourselves to reach before. And it
changed us in a profound way. It opened
up our heart. It opened up what the
Hindus would call the heart chakra. That
was it. There was a fundamental birth of
oneness of fellowship that also was
accompanied with an opening of the the
mind. When the heart is open, the mind
also begins to open. And everywhere,
everywhere I was, there was new ways of
thinking, new values, new common sense,
new insights, new kinds of patterns
emerging and new fed on new and there
was just an explosion of a new
uh a new humanity emerged. And this was
not simply this wasn't a new
civilization and it wasn't a new economy
and something like a new cultural. This
was a a shift in the fundamental plate
tectonics of the collective psyche. The
the the collective psyche was so
energized by the suffering of all of its
members around the world. And this is
something which is historically
unprecedented because we know pieces of
a nations can suffer but no one has
experienced the suffering of the entire
planet in a global crisis of this
magnitude. And all the individual
sufferings hyperstimulated the field of
our collective mind. And in this hyper
stimulated what a physicist would call a
nonlinear state moving into nonlinear
conditions nature can do extraordinary
things. It can precipitate changes,
innovations, new emerging structures
much faster than we ever thought
possible before.
So
what I did come to I came to understand
that we are moving into a time of
accelerated development. But just as in
mystical development before a mystic
comes into their great mystical
breakthroughs there is a dark night of
the soul there is a radical undoing a
radical purification an offloading of
all the beliefs and habits and patterns
of the past. And if we are coming into a
time of collective spiritual awakening,
I think we are first are going through
collective dark night of the soul. Which
means we have to face all the
all the habits of mind, all the habits
of thinking, all the divisions that
we've drawn in history and the divisions
between religions and the divisions
between classes and the divisions
between races and just we have to
literally let go of the habits of
history. clear this out in order to open
to this infusion of an opportunity of a
deeper experience of ourselves and a
deeper relationship of the universe. And
then later in later sessions
in some of the last sessions I was given
the grace of being taken deep into the
future and to experience this future
human just to experience it not as a
future thing but as something that had
already been accomplished because we're
in deep time now.
And this future human was so beautiful.
If I try to describe it I truly am
probably going to break down in tears.
It's just magnificent being just a
humanity healed of all the wounds of its
history. A humanity open heart and a
humanity with a completely different
relationship to spiritual reality and to
the intelligence the creative
intelligence of the universe.
Now [snorts] at another part in my
journey I had another experience that I
came to understand was part and parcel
of this story.
The future human is not some sci-fi. We
don't have to go to sci-fi to imagine
what the human future human is going to
be. The future human has been in
development for hundreds of thousands of
years. And it's been in development
through reincarnation. We have been
incarnating and learning and developing
and learning and developing for lifetime
after lifetime after lifetime. So the
pattern I think is when we die, we
return to the soul, the 100,000year
consciousness. We incarnate into a
hundred-year consciousness. We return to
the soul. We incarnate. If you just
imagine this going on for hundreds and
hundreds of cycles, sooner or later, it
seems only natural that the soul, the
whole consciousness that we are
awakens inside our incarnations.
And this was actually what I experienced
in one of the sessions. As I had a
session after deep profound
purification processes, all of my former
lives started coming into me. They just
started coming in. It was like wrapping
a filament of white light around a kite
spool.
And they reached a point where they
seemed to hit a critical mass. And when
they hit a critical mass, they fused
into one. And when they fused, there was
an explosion of diamond light out of my
chest. And I was catapulted into a state
of consciousness
that was beyond anything I had
experienced up to that point in time.
And in that state of consciousness, I
was an individual, but I was an
individual beyond any frame of reference
that I could imagine. I wasn't Chris
Bash, but I was an individual.
And then I was given a series of
instructions and teachings that helped
me understand that what I was
experiencing is not a personal thing for
me. This is what reincarnation is doing
with humanity.
We grow incrementally. We justate a a
new baby is justated for nine months.
It's a long gestation process. But there
comes a point when labor comes and it's
a tough day. It's a hard day, very
demanding, very dangerous, might not
survive. But when it's over, a new life
is born into the world. I think that
something like that is taking place for
humanity. We are entering a time of the
collective purification, a loss of old
values, a having to confront the limits
of old ways of thinking, seeing and
seeing how ugly and dirty they really
are. We don't want anything to do with
them. But we have to see this in
ourselves because we are carrying those
sins of our fathers because we were our
fathers and the sins of our mothers. We
were our mothers and fathers in the
past. We carry it all within us. We all
have to go through this process. We all
have to let go of the past and allow
ourselves to be remade. And in that
process, I think what's happening is we
are giving birth to what I call the
diamond soul. The we are growing up. We
are growing up into the consciousness
that has been justating in history for
thousands of years. The future human I
think is the diamond soul and that is
beings, human beings who are conscious
of their entire history. Not in a
confused and confusing way but in a
clear way. all the essentials and they
are operating not as a course of many
lives but as a single individuality
which incorporates all that life
experience into one being. That's what I
think is happening. We are in the be we
are in the unraveling process. We are in
the very hard times and I think it's
going to be getting much harder over
several generations. we are in very very
hard times and I think it's really
important to understand what's happening
at a deep level because if we don't
we're going to be very susceptible to
despair. We're going to think, oh, we're
being punished or it's hopeless or we're
just all going to die. We need to
understand that this is labor. We are
giving birth to something magnificent.
And just as a mother forgets her pain
when the baby is there, likewise
humanity will forget the pain of
birthing. This has been going on for
hundreds of thousands of years. When
this new consciousness
emerges across humanity, synergistically
across all humanity, I don't think it's
going to happen, you know, magically
flip a switch and there we're going to
go. But basically, we're going through
this transition. A new kind of human
being is emerging. And I think we can
see the prototypes of that new kind of
human being in our great religious
leaders and our great saints in the
Christ and the Buddhas and the prophets
of history. We get inklings of this
higher potential coming forward and
emerging. Okay, that's what I think.
That's where we are. And I think by the
way I think every person on this planet
chose to incarnate at this time in
history. There are no victims. We all
chose to be part of this process. We all
chose to be to live through this and to
contribute to it and it's all hands on
deck time.
>> Beautifully put. And there might be a
reason there are so many of us right
now. The reason being connected to
exactly this. I mean it sounds again
like um Rosaian regeneration ideas,
>> right? The idea that a new world is born
through this through this process or the
world gets regenerated.
Very nice. Very nice. Um [clears throat]
there are many places I could go but we
said uh two hours and that's a brilliant
way to stop. Maybe in the future um we
could discuss where this conversation
was leading which is more to the deep
ecology of mind stuff I suppose and
maybe just focus solely on that topic
because I still have a lot of things
uh to talk about
>> a real pleasure to have this
conversation. I want to thank you for
allowing me to have this conversation
with your viewers. It's it's been an
honor and it's been a real pleasure.
>> Yeah. Likewise. Thank you very much.
Yeah.
Heat.
[music]
Heat. Heat. Heat.
Heat. Heat.
[music]
Heat. Heat. [music]
>> [music]
[music]